.. meta::
  :description: Documentation of the usage of pc-sampling with rocprofv3 command-line tool
  :keywords: Sampling PC, Sampling program counter, rocprofv3, rocprofv3 tool usage, Using rocprofv3, ROCprofiler-SDK command line tool, PC sampling

.. _using-pc-sampling:

==================
Using PC sampling
==================

PC (Program Counter) sampling service for GPU profiling is a profiling technique to periodically sample the program counter during GPU kernel execution. PC sampling helps in understanding code execution patterns and identifying hotspot(s).

Here are the benefits of using PC sampling:

- Identify performance bottlenecks
- Understand kernel execution behavior
- Analyze code coverage
- Find heavily executed code paths

To try out the PC sampling feature, you can use the command-line tool ``rocprofv3`` or the ROCprofiler-SDK library on `ROCm 6.4` or later.

.. note::
  PC sampling is ONLY supported on AMD GPUs with architectures gfx90a and later.

PC sampling availability and configuration
===========================================

To check if the GPU supports PC sampling, use:

.. code-block:: bash

  rocprofv3 -L

Or

.. code-block:: bash

  rocprofv3 --list-avail

The output lists if ``rocprofv3`` supports PC sampling on the GPU and the supported configuration.

.. code-block:: bash

    GPU:0
    NAME:gfx90a
    configs:
       Method              :host_trap
       Unit                :time
       Min_Interval        :1
       Max_Interval        :18446744073709551615
       Flags               :none

The preceding output shows that the GPU supports PC sampling with the ``ROCPROFILER_PC_SAMPLING_METHOD_HOST_TRAP`` method and the ``ROCPROFILER_PC_SAMPLING_UNIT_TIME`` unit. The minimum and maximum intervals are also displayed.

.. note::
   Important firmware fixes to host-trap and stochastic PC-sampling for AMD Instinct MI300X have been made in ROCm 7.0.
   To ensure that you have the latest fixes, check if you have the correct firmware versions installed:

   For host-trap PC-sampling on MI300X: PSP TOS Firmware >= version 00.36.02.59 or 0x00360259
   For stochastic PC-sampling on MI300X  as described in the following section: MEC Firmware feature version: 50, firmware version >= 0x0000001a

To check the firmware versions, use:

.. code-block:: bash

  # To check PSP TOS Firmware: 
  sudo cat /sys/kernel/debug/dri/0/amdgpu_firmware_info | grep SOS

  # To check MEC Firmware:
  sudo cat /sys/kernel/debug/dri/1/amdgpu_firmware_info | grep MEC

Based on the available PC-sampling configurations, use the following command to profile the application using PC-sampling:

.. code-block:: bash

  rocprofv3 --pc-sampling-beta-enabled --pc-sampling-method host_trap --pc-sampling-unit time --pc-sampling-interval 1 --output-format csv -- <application_path>

The preceding command enables PC sampling with the ``host_trap`` method, ``time`` unit, and an interval of ``1`` μs (microsecond). Replace ``<application_path>`` with the path to the application you want to profile.

This generates two files, ``agent_info.csv`` and ``pc_sampling_host_trap.csv``. Both files are prefixed with the process ID.

Here are the contents of ``pc_sampling_host_trap.csv`` file generated for MatrixTranspose sample application:

.. csv-table:: PC sampling host trap
   :file: /data/pc_sampling_host_trap.csv
   :widths: 20,10,10,10,10,20
   :header-rows: 1


For description of the fields in the output file, see :ref:`pc-sampling-fields`.

If you find the ``Instruction_Comment`` field in the output file to be empty, populate this field by compiling your application with debug symbols.
Enabling debug symbols while compiling the application maps back to the source line. This helps in understanding the code execution pattern and hotspots.

.. csv-table:: PC sampling host trap with debug symbols
   :file: /data/pc_sampling_host_trap_debug.csv
   :widths: 20,10,10,10,10,20
   :header-rows: 1


The preceding output shows the ``Instruction_Comment`` field populated with the source-line information.

.. _pc-sampling-fields:

PC sampling fields
===================

Here are the fields in the output file generated by PC sampling:

- ``Sample_Timestamp``: Timestamp when sample is generated
- ``Exec_Mask``: Active SIMD lanes when sampled
- ``Dispatch_Id``: Originating kernel dispatch ID
- ``Instruction``: Assembly instruction such as ``s_load_dword s8, s[1:2], 0x10``
- ``Instruction_Comment``: Instruction comment that maps back to the source-line if debug symbols were enabled when application was compiled
- ``Correlation_Id``: API launch call ID that matches dispatch ID

 To dump samples in a more comprehensive format, use JSON through ``--output-format json``:

.. code-block:: bash

  rocprofv3 --pc-sampling-beta-enabled --pc-sampling-method host_trap --pc-sampling-unit time --pc-sampling-interval 1 --output-format json -- <application_path>

The preceding command generates a JSON file with the comprehensive output. Here is a trimmed down output with multiple records:

.. code-block:: text

  {
    "pc_sample_host_trap": [
      {
        "record": {
          "hw_id": {
            "chiplet": 0,
            "wave_id": 0,
            "simd_id": 2,
            "pipe_id": 0,
            "cu_or_wgp_id": 1,
            "shader_array_id": 0,
            "shader_engine_id": 2,
            "workgroup_id": 0,
            "vm_id": 3,
            "queue_id": 2,
            "microengine_id": 1
          },
          "pc": {
            "code_object_id": 1,
            "code_object_offset": 20228
          },
          "exec_mask": 18446744073709551615,
          "timestamp": 51040126667689,
          "dispatch_id": 1,
          "corr_id": {
            "internal": 1,
            "external": 0
          },
          "wrkgrp_id": {
            "x": 182,
            "y": 0,
            "z": 0
          },
          "wave_in_grp": 1
        },
        "inst_index": 0
      },
      {
        "record": {
          "hw_id": {
            "chiplet": 0,
            "wave_id": 0,
            "simd_id": 2,
            "pipe_id": 0,
            "cu_or_wgp_id": 0,
            "shader_array_id": 0,
            "shader_engine_id": 2,
            "workgroup_id": 0,
            "vm_id": 3,
            "queue_id": 2,
            "microengine_id": 1
          },
          "pc": {
            "code_object_id": 1,
            "code_object_offset": 20236
          },
          "exec_mask": 18446744073709551615,
          "timestamp": 51040126667689,
          "dispatch_id": 1,
          "corr_id": {
            "internal": 1,
            "external": 0
          },
          "wrkgrp_id": {
            "x": 158,
            "y": 0,
            "z": 0
          },
          "wave_in_grp": 2
        },
        "inst_index": 1
      }
    ]
  }

For description of the fields in the JSON output, see :ref:`output-file-fields`.

An Arbitrary Host-Trap PC Sampling Skid
===============================================

Host-Trap PC sampling is a software-based technique that utilizes a background kernel thread
to periodically interrupt running waves in order to capture the program counter (PC).
This method is effective for gathering performance data without requiring specialized hardware
to snapshot the waves. However, it has limitations due to the potential delay between 
when a wave receives an interrupt and when it processes the interrupt to capture the PC.
This delay can lead to a sampling skid, where the PC samples may be attributed to instructions
that are up to two instructions away from the actual source of latency.
This results in a non-precise intra-kernel sampling method.

When analyzing an application profile generated by host-trap PC sampling,
developers should consider not only the reported most costly instruction but
also the instructions immediately preceding or following it.
If the costly instruction is near a branch instruction, it is important 
to also consider the instruction targeted by the branch and the one immediately following it.

To address the limitations of host-trap sampling, the hardware-based stochastic PC sampling method
has been developed. This method provides precise intra-kernel sampling with zero sampling skid,
offering more accurate performance insights.

It is important to note that the skid issue inherent in host-trap PC sampling will not be resolved
in its current form. Therefore, users are encouraged to adopt stochastic PC sampling,
starting with the GFX942 architecture, to achieve more precise performance profiling.

Hardware-Based (Stochastic) PC Sampling Method
===============================================

The new ``ROCPROFILER_PC_SAMPLING_METHOD_STOCHASTIC`` has been introduced for gfx942 architecture.
It employs a specific hardware for probing waves actively running on GPU.
Beside information already provided with ``ROCPROFILER_PC_SAMPLING_METHOD_HOST_TRAP`` useful for determining hot-spots within the kernel,
it delivers additional information that tells whether a sampled wave issued an instruction represented with particular PC.
If not, it provides the reason for not issuing the instruction (stall reason).
This type of information is particularly useful for understanding stalls during the kernel execution.

To use this method on gfx942, we recommend listing available PC sampling configurations to verify if the latest ROCm stack is installed
on the system by running:

.. code-block:: bash

  rocprofv3 -L

Output similar to the following indicates that the ``ROCPROFILER_PC_SAMPLING_METHOD_STOCHASTIC`` method is available:

.. code-block:: bash

    GPU:1
    NAME:gfx942
    configs:
       Method              :stochastic
       Unit                :cycle
       Min_Interval        :256
       Max_Interval        :2147483648
       Flags               :interval pow2

Please note that on gfx942, `ROCPROFILER_PC_SAMPLING_METHOD_STOCHASTIC` requires intervals to be specified in cycles, whose values are powers of 2

To profile a gfx942 accelerated application with ``ROCPROFILER_PC_SAMPLING_METHOD_STOCHASTIC`` PC sampling, one can use the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

  rocprofv3 --pc-sampling-beta-enabled --pc-sampling-method stochastic --pc-sampling-unit cycles --pc-sampling-interval 1048576 --output-format csv, json -- <application_path>

The previous command serializes samples in both CSV and JSON output formats in the ``pc_sampling_stochastic.csv`` and ``out_results.json`` files, respectively.

Comparing the ``pc_sampling_stochastic.csv`` to ``pc_sampling_host_trap`` from previous section, one can notice that the ``ROCPROFILER_PC_SAMPLING_METHOD_STOCHASTIC`` method
generates additional fields:
- ``Wave_Issued_Instruction``: Indicates whether the wave issued an instruction (value 1) represented with particular PC or not (value 0)
- ``Instruction_Type``: If the value of ``Wave_Issued_Instruction`` is 1, this fields indicates the type of the issued instruction. Otherwise, this fields irrelevant.
- ``Stall_Reason``: If the value of ``Wave_Issued_Instruction`` is 0, this fields indicates the reason for not issuing the instruction (stall reason). Otherwise, this field is irrelevant.
- ``Wave_Count``: Total number of waves actively running on a compute unit when the sample was generated.

.. csv-table:: PC sampling stochastic with debug symbols
   :file: /data/pc_sampling_stochastic_debug.csv
   :widths: 20,10,10,10,10,20,10,20,20,10
   :header-rows: 1

Similarly, ``ROCPROFILER_PC_SAMPLING_METHOD_STOCHASTIC`` method delivers additional information to every sample in the JSON output.
The following snippet shows one sample from ``out_results.json`` file.

.. code-block:: text

  {
    "record": {
      "flags": {
        "has_mem_cnt": 0
      },
      "hw_id": {
        "chiplet": 4,
        "wave_id": 0,
        "simd_id": 2,
        "pipe_id": 3,
        "cu_or_wgp_id": 1,
        "shader_array_id": 0,
        "shader_engine_id": 3,
        "workgroup_id": 0,
        "vm_id": 3,
        "queue_id": 2,
        "microengine_id": 1
      },
      "pc": {
        "code_object_id": 2,
        "code_object_offset": 13880
      },
      "exec_mask": 18446744073709551615,
      "timestamp": 390705261924637,
      "dispatch_id": 29,
      "corr_id": {
        "internal": 29,
        "external": 0
      },
      "wrkgrp_id": {
        "x": 9,
        "y": 489,
        "z": 0
      },
      "wave_in_grp": 0,
      "wave_issued": 1,
      "inst_type": "ROCPROFILER_PC_SAMPLING_INSTRUCTION_TYPE_VALU",
      "wave_cnt": 6,
      "snapshot": {
        "stall_reason": "ROCPROFILER_PC_SAMPLING_INSTRUCTION_NOT_ISSUED_REASON_OTHER_WAIT",
        "dual_issue_valu": 0,
        "arb_state_issue_valu": 1,
        "arb_state_issue_matrix": 0,
        "arb_state_issue_lds": 0,
        "arb_state_issue_lds_direct": 0,
        "arb_state_issue_scalar": 0,
        "arb_state_issue_vmem_tex": 0,
        "arb_state_issue_flat": 0,
        "arb_state_issue_exp": 0,
        "arb_state_issue_misc": 0,
        "arb_state_issue_brmsg": 0,
        "arb_state_stall_valu": 0,
        "arb_state_stall_matrix": 0,
        "arb_state_stall_lds": 0,
        "arb_state_stall_lds_direct": 0,
        "arb_state_stall_scalar": 0,
        "arb_state_stall_vmem_tex": 0,
        "arb_state_stall_flat": 0,
        "arb_state_stall_exp": 0,
        "arb_state_stall_misc": 0,
        "arb_state_stall_brmsg": 0
      }
    },
    "inst_index": 1
  },

Fields starting with ``arb_state_`` are of particular interest as they indicate the state of the arbiter at the time of sampling.
Namely, ``arb_state_issue_`` fields indicate what type of instructions arbiter issued at the time of sampling.
On the other hand, ``arb_state_stall_`` fields indicate what type of instructions were stalled at the time of sampling.
This information is useful for understanding how many instructions per cycle (IPC) are issued.

